what if I told you the time has a race a
race in the contemporary way that we
understand race in the United States
typically we talk about race in terms of
black and white issues and yes in
American communities from which I come
we have a long-standing
multi-generational joke about what we
call CP time or color people time now we
no longer refer to african-americans as
colored but this long-standing joke
about our perpetual lateness to church
to cookout to family events and even to
our own funeral world remains I
personally am a stickler for time it's
almost as if my mother when I was
growing up said we will not be those
black people so we typically arrived to
have been thirty minutes early but today
I want to talk to you more about the
political nature of time for a time how
to race it would be white white people
own time I know I know
making such quote/unquote incendiary
statements makes us uncomfortable
haven't we move past the point where
race really matters is it race a
heavy-handed concept should we go ahead
with our enlightened progressive selves
and relegate useless concepts like race
to the dustbins of history how will we
ever get over racism if we keep on
talking about race
perhaps we should lock up our concepts
of race and a time capsule bury them and
dig them up in a thousand years
peer at them with the clearly more
enlightened raceless versions of
ourselves that belong to the future but
you see there that desire to mitigate
the impact of race and racism shows up
and how we attempt to manage time in the
ways we narrate history and the way we
attempt to shove the negative terms of
the president of the past in the ways we
attempt to argue that the future that we
hope for is the present in which we're
currently living
now when Barack Obama became president
of the US and 2008 many Americans
declared that we were post-racial I'm
from the Academy where we're enamored
with being post everything we're
postmodern we're post structural we're
post feminist post has become a simple
academic appendage that we apply to a
range of terms to mark the way we were
but prefixes alone don't have the power
to make race and racism a thing of the
past the US was never pre raised so to
claim that we're post race when we have
yet to grapple with the impacts of race
on black people Latinos are the
indigenous is disingenuous just about
the moment that we were preparing to
celebrate our post-racial future our
political conditions became the most
racial they've been in the last 50 years
so today I want to offer to you three
observations about the past the present
and the future of time as it relates to
the combating of racism and white
dominance first the past time has a
history and so do black people but we
treat time as though it is timeless as
though it has always been this way as
though it doesn't have a political
history bound up with the plunder of
indigenous lands the genocide of
indigenous people and the stealing of
Africans from their homeland
when white male European philosophers
first thought to conceptualize time and
history one famously declared Africa is
no historical part of the world he was
essentially saying that Africans were
people outside of history who had had no
impact on time or the march of progress
this idea that black people have had no
impact on history is one of the
foundational ideas of white supremacy
it's the reason that Carter G Woodson
created Negro History Week in 1926 it's
the reason that we continue to celebrate
Black History Month in the u.s. every
February now we also see this idea that
black people are people either
alternately outside the bounds of time
or stuck in the past
in a scenario where what is I'm doing
right now a black person stands up and
insists that racism still matters and a
person usually white says to them why
are you stuck in the past
why can't you move on we have a black
president we're past all that
William Faulkner famously said the past
is never dead it's not even past but my
good friend professor Christy Dotson
says our memory is longer than our
lifespan we carry all of us family and
communal hopes and dreams with us we
don't have the luxury of letting go of
the past but sometimes our political
conditions are so troubling that we
don't know if we're living in the past
or we're living in the present take for
instance when black lives matter
protesters go out to protest unjust
killings of black citizens by police and
the pictures that emerge from the
protests look like they could have been
taken 50 years ago the past won't let us
go but still let us press our way into
the prison at present I would argue that
the racial struggles we are experiencing
are clashes over time and space what do
I mean well I've already told you that
white people own time those in power
dictate the pace of the workday they
dictate how much money our time is
actually worth and Professor George
Lipsitz argues that white people even
dictate the pace of social inclusion
they dictate how long it will actually
take for minority groups to receive the
rights that they have been fighting for
let me loop back to the past quickly to
give you an example if you think about
the civil rights movement and the cries
of its leaders for freedom now they were
challenging the slow pace of white
social inclusion by 1965 the year the
Voting Rights Act was passed there has
been a full 100 years between the end of
the Civil War and the conferral of
voting
right on african-american communities
the slice of urgency of a war it still
took a whole 100 years for actual social
inclusion to occur since 2012
conservative state legislators across
the u.s. have ramped up attempts to
rollback African American voting rights
by passing restrictive voter ID laws and
curtailing early voting opportunities
this past July a federal court struck
down North Carolina's voter ID law
saying it quote targeted
african-americans with surgical
precision restricting African American
inclusion in the body politic is a
primary way that we attempt to manage
and control people by managing and
controlling time but another place that
we see these kind of space crashes is in
gentrifying cities like Atlanta Brooklyn
Philadelphia New Orleans in Washington
DC places that have had black
populations for generations but now in
the name of urban renewal and progress
these communities are pushed out and
service of bringing them into the 21st
century
Sharon Holland professor Sharon Holland
asked what happens when a person who
exists in time meet someone who only
occupies space these racial struggles
are battles over those who are perceived
to be space takers and those who have
received to be world makers those who
control the flow and thrust of history
are considered world makers who own and
master time in other words white people
but when Hegel famously said that Africa
was no historical part of the world he
implies it was merely a voluminous
landmass taking up space at the bottom
of the globe Africans were space takers
so today
white people continue to control the
flow interest of history while too often
treating black people as though we are
merely taking up space to which we are
not entitled time and the march of
progress is used to justify a stunning
degree of violence towards the our most
vulnerable populations who being
perceived as
takers rather than world makers are
moved out of the places where they live
and service of bringing them into the
21st century shortened lifespan
according to zip code is just one
example of the ways that time and space
cohere and an unjust manner in the lives
of black people children who were born
in New Orleans of code 7 0 1 2 4 which
is 93 percent white can expect to live a
full 25 years longer than children born
in New Orleans of code 7 0 1 1 2 which
is 60% black children born in Washington
DC's wealthy Maryland suburbs can expect
to live a full 20 years longer than
children born in its downtown
neighborhoods Tana Coates
argues that the defining feature of
being drafted into the black race is the
inescapable robbery of time we
experience time discrimination he tells
us not just the structural but as
personal and lost moments of joy lost
moments of connection lost quality of
time with loved ones and lost years of
healthy quality of life in the future do
you see black people do black people
have a future what if you belong to the
very race of people who have always been
pitted against time what if your group
is the group for whom a future was never
imagined these time space clashes
between protesters and police between
gender fires and residents don't paint a
very pretty picture of what America
hopes for black people's future that the
present is any indicator
our children will be under educated
health maladies will take their toll and
housing will continue to be unaffordable
so if we're really ready to talk about
the future perhaps we should begin by
admitting that we're out of time we
black people have always been out of
time time does not belong to us
our lives our lives of Perpetual urgency
time is used to displace us or
conversely we are urged into complacency
through endless calls to just be patient
but if past is prologue let us seize
upon the ways in which we're always out
of time anyway to demand with urgency
freedom now I believe the future is what
we make it but first we have to decide
that time belongs to all of us no we
don't all get equal time but we can
decide that the time that we do get is
just and free we can stop making your
zipcode the primary determinant of your
lifespan we can stop stealing learning
time from black children through
excessive use of suspensions and
explosions we can stop stealing time
from black people through long periods
of incarceration for nonviolent crimes
the police can stop stealing time and
black lives through use of excessive
force I believe the future is what we
make it but we can't get there on
colored people top or white time or your
time or even my time it's our time Alex
thank you
[Applause]